Add a blog post entry on what's new in Swift debugging in 5.9 (#368)
apple/swift-org-website: _posts/2023-08-25-whats-new-swift-debugging-5.9.md

---
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-08-25 12:34:56

> title: What's new in Swift debugging on the 5.9 branch?

Reviewer: Smart quote: What’s

The title says ‘on the 5.9 branch’ but by now everything in the 5.9 branch has been merged and released.

A different title would be more accurate. Possibly:  
“What’s new in debugging in Swift 5.9?”

Or, since the changes include LLDB, maybe the intent was to indicate it is more than a Swift compiler change?

If so, maybe use “5.9 toolchain” instead of “5.9 branch”?

“What’s new in Swift debugging in the 5.9 toolchain”

Another approach might be to emphasize that these are improvements and not just new things:

“Debugging improvements in the Swift 5.9 toolchain”

or more concise:
“Debugging Improvements in Swift 5.9"

> title: What's new in Swift debugging on the 5.9 branch?

Author: ```suggestion
title: Debugging Improvements in Swift 5.9
```

author: [adrian-prantl, augustonoronha, kastiglione]
---

> On the Swift 5.9 branch, we introduced a couple of new features to [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") and the Swift compiler to improve the debugging experience. In this post, we are highlighting three changes that we expect to have the most noticeable impact on Swift debugging workflows.

Reviewer: Similar to my comment about the title, I am assuming the Swift 5.9 branch is already merged and released.

Possibly change “On the Swift 5.9 branch” to just “In Swift 5.9” or “In the Swift 5.9 toolchain”.

Author: ```suggestion
Swift 5.9 introduced a number of new debugging features to the Swift compiler and the [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") debugger.

Here are three changes that can help with your everyday debugging workflows.

On the Swift 5.9 branch, we introduced a couple of new features to [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") and the Swift compiler to improve the debugging experience. In this post, we are highlighting three changes that we expect to have the most noticeable impact on Swift debugging workflows.
```

> ### Faster `p` and `po`

Reviewer 2: Can we up-level this for folks less experienced in using LLDB? Something like "Faster variable inspection" ?

Author: ```suggestion
### Faster variable inspection with the `p` and `po` commands
```

> The `p` and `po` command aliases have been redefined to the new `dwim-print` command. The `dwim-print` command prints values using the most user-friendly implementation. "DWIM" is an acronym for "Do What I Mean". Specifically, when printing variables, `dwim-print` will use the same implementation as `frame variable` or `v` instead of the more expensive expression evaluator.

Author: ```suggestion
LLDB provides the shorthand `p` command alias to inspect variables and `po` to call the debugDescription property of objects. Originally, these were aliases for the rather heavyweight `expression` and `expression -O` commands. In Swift 5.9, the `p` and `po` command aliases have been redefined to the new `dwim-print` command. The `dwim-print` command prints values using the most user-friendly implementation. "DWIM" is an acronym for "Do What I Mean". Specifically, when printing variables, `dwim-print` will use the same implementation as `frame variable` or `v` instead of the more expensive expression evaluator.
```

> By default, the output of `p` no longer includes a persistent result variable, such as `$0`, or `$R0`. In addition to the overhead incurred by persisting the result, persistent result variables retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:

Reviewer 2: "In addition to being faster, using 'p' no longer creates persistent result variables, which are often unused in debugging sessions and incur both overhead and …"

Reviewer 2: Can we get a quick example output of using the command? Does it look different?

Author: The output is identical except that `$R0 =` is missing.

Author: ```suggestion
"In addition to being faster, using `p` no longer creates persistent result variables like `$R0`, which are often unused in debugging sessions. Persistent result variables not only incur overhead but also retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:
```

```

> command unalias p

Reviewer 2: Should we remove this example? I'm not sure the casual reader interested in how debugging improved will necessarily need instructions for reverting the old behavior in this blog post. The information should certainly be available somewhere though.

Author: I like this example because it shows is that all of these command aliases are completely customizable and it can serve in making the readers curious to want to learn more about the more advanced features of the debugger.

Reviewer 2: Let's call that out specifically then. How about we start a new paragraph with "Users who want …" and frame it that way: "Users who want persistent results on occasion can use … If you wish to enable persistent results every time, you can take advantage of LLDB's handy alias feature:"

command alias p dwim-print --persistent-result on --
```

> The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects by their *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.

Reviewer 2: Is there before and after we could show about how this is improved?

Author: ```suggestion
The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects by their *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.

Old behavior in Swift 5.8 and earlier:
```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
(Int) 105553155867600
```

New behavior in Swift 5.9:
```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
<MyApp.AppDelegate: 0x6000025c43d0>
```

> See [Introduce dwim-print command](https://reviews.llvm.org/D138315 "LLVM review") and [Change dwim-print to default to disabled persistent results](https://reviews.llvm.org/D145609 "LLVM review") for the patches that introduced these changes.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the average blog reader will need links to the patches. Do you think they add value?

Author: They serve a similar purpose that links to evolution proposals serve in other blog posts. It offers a peek at at the development process and highlights that this is an open process where everybody is invited to contribute.

If you feel strongly about this we can remove them.

Reviewer 2: I see. The Swift Evolution proposals usually have a lot of English to read for those who are curious, without going to the source. The patch links are mostly source, or discussion about the change.

How about we embed these two links within the paragraph? The dwim-print patch can be linked by the first mention of "dwim-print" in the above paragraph, and the change in persisted behavior can be linked with the phrase "no longer creates persistent result variables".

> ### Using generic type parameters in expressions

Reviewer 2: "Support for generic type parameters in expressions" ?

Author: ```suggestion
### Support for generic type parameters in expressions
```

LLDB now supports referring to generic type parameters in expression evaluation. For example, given the following code:

```swift
func use<T>(_ t: T) {
    print(t) // break here
}

use(5)
use("Hello!”)
```

> Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second. This can be especially useful in combination with conditional breakpoints to stop only when a generic function is instantiated with a certain concrete type. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second. This can be especially useful in combination with conditional breakpoints to stop only when a generic function is instantiated with a certain concrete type. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self` (at the moment, using generic type parameters in conditional breakpoints is only available on the open source Swift 5.9 toolchain).
```

@adrian-prantl @cthielen

Author: How about:

```suggestion
Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second. This can be especially useful in combination with conditional breakpoints to stop only when a generic function is instantiated with a certain concrete type. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`. (Note that this last example only works on nightly builds of the Swift 5.9 toolchain.)
```

Author: @cthielen For context: There was a bugfix made this week https://github.com/apple/llvm-project/pull/7493 that's needed here.
Is this wording acceptable?

> Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second. This can be especially useful in combination with conditional breakpoints to stop only when a generic function is instantiated with a certain concrete type. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`.

Reviewer 2: This is another one where before-and-after output examples would help make the message more impactful.

Reviewer 2: Is it "especially useful" or is this a separate feature to be called out, e.g. "In addition to displaying the concrete type of the generic, you can set breakpoints that look for concrete types. This …"

> More details about the implementation of this feature can be found in the [LLDB PR](https://github.com/apple/llvm-project/pull/5715) introducing it.

Reviewer 2: Is this the best reference, or is there a LLDB guide we could link to?

Author: Unfortunately that is the best we have.

> ### More precise scope information in the Swift compiler

Reviewer 2: Can we state this in terms of benefit to the developer as they debug? e.g. it's not about the Swift compiler, it's about the debugger displaying more precise scope information. How about "Fine-grained scope information" or something to that effect?

Author: ```suggestion
### Fine-grained scope information
```

The Swift compiler now emits more precise lexical scopes in the debug information. Scope information allows a debugger to distinguish between the different variables that are all called `x` in the following example:

```swift
func f(x: AnyObject?) {
  // function parameter `x: AnyObject?`
  guard let x else {}
  // local variable `x: AnyObject`, which shadows the function argument `x`
  ...
}
```

In fact, the Swift language's scoping rules allow some astonishing things to be done with variable bindings:

> ```swift

Reviewer 2: This example is a little inscrutable. Again, it feels like it would be more impactful to show what was before and after. How was the scope information lacking in information before?

enum E<T> {
case A(T)
case B(T)
case C(String)
case D(T, T, T)
}

func f<T>(_ e: E<T>) -> String {
  switch e {
  case .A(let a), .B(let a): return "One variable \(a): T in scope"
  case .C(let a):            return "One variable \(a): String in scope"
  case .D(let a, _, let c):  return "One \(a): T and one \(c): T in scope"
  default:                   return "Only the function argument e is in scope"
  }
}
```

All of these can be correctly disambiguated by LLDB thanks to lexical scope debug information.

The Swift compiler now uses more accurate ASTScope information to generate the lexical scope hierarchy in the debug information, which results in some behavior changes in the debugger. In the example below, the local variable `a` is not yet in scope at the call site of `getInt()` and will only be available after it has been assigned:

```
  1 func getInt() -> Int { return 42 }
  2
  3 func f() {
  4     let a = getInt()
                ^
  5     print(a)
  6 }

(lldb) p a
error: <EXPR>:3:1: error: cannot find 'a' in scope

(lldb) n
  3 func f() {
  4     let a = getInt()
  5     print(a)
        ^
  6 }

(lldb) p a
42
```

> With the debug information produced by previous versions of the Swift compiler, the debugger might have displayed uninitialized memory as the contents of `a` at the call site of `getInt()`. In Swift 5.9 the variable `a` only becomes visible after it has been initialized.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph should be brought up to the start of this section. Otherwise, you're sort of showing something and then explaining what was shown. Better to state the change, then demonstrate it.

> For more details, see the [pull request](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/64941) that introduced this change.

Reviewer 2: Is there better documentation than the PR?

Author: No.

> ### Getting involved

Reviewer 2: Active voice perhaps? "Get involved"

Author: ```suggestion
### Get involved
```

> If you want to learn more about Swift debugging and LLDB, provide feedback, or want to get started with improving the tooling, debug information, or the debugger itself, come join us in the [LLDB section](https://forums.swift.org/c/development/lldb/13) of the Swift development forums!

Reviewer 2: I think you could shorten this a bit: "If you want to learn more about Swift debugging and LLDB, provide feedback, or contribute to the tooling itself, join us in the …"

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to learn more about Swift debugging and LLDB, provide feedback, or contribute to the tooling itself, join us in the [LLDB section](https://forums.swift.org/c/development/lldb/13) of the Swift development forums!
```

---
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-08-25 12:34:56

> title: SSWG 2023 Annual Update

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: What's new in Swift debugging on the 5.9 branch?
```

author: [adrian-prantl, augustonoronha, kastiglione]
---

> ## What’s new in Swift debugging on the 5.9 branch?

Reviewer 5: This will add duplicate titles as we're already using the `title` as the H1 on the page. We should remove it.

```suggestion
```

> On the Swift 5.9 branch we introduced a couple of new features to [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") and the Swift compiler to improve the debugging experience. In this post we are highlighting three changes that we expect to have the most noticeable impact on Swift debugging workflows.

Reviewer 6: branch we -> branch, we
post we are highlighting -> post, we highlight

### Faster `p` and `po`

> The `p` and `po` command aliases have been redefined to the new `dwim-print` command. The `dwim-print` command prints values using the most user friendly implementation. "DWIM" is an acronym for "Do What I Mean". Specifically, when printing variables, `dwim-print` will use the same implementation as `frame variable` or `v` instead of the more expensive expression evaluator.

Reviewer 6: user friendly -> user-friendly

By default, the output of `p` no longer includes a persistent result variable, such as `$0`, or `$R0`. In addition to the overhead incurred by persisting the result, persistent result variables retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:

```
command unalias p
command alias p dwim-print --persistent-result on --
```

> The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects by their *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under hood to produce the expected result.

Reviewer 6: under hood -> under the hood

See [Introduce dwim-print command](https://reviews.llvm.org/D138315 "LLVM review") and [Change dwim-print to default to disabled persistent results](https://reviews.llvm.org/D145609 "LLVM review") for the patches that introduced these changes.

### Using generic type parameters in expressions

LLDB now supports referring to generic type parameters in expression evaluation. For example, given the following code:

```swift
func use<T>(_ t: T) {
    print(t) // break here
}

use(5)
use("Hello!”)
```

> Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second. This can be especially useful in combination with conditional breakpoints to stop only when a generic function is instantiated with a certain concrete type. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside use will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`.

Reviewer 6: inside use -> inside `use`

---
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-08-25 12:34:56
title: Debugging Improvements in Swift 5.9
author: [adrian-prantl, augustonoronha, kastiglione]
---

Swift 5.9 introduced a number of new debugging features to the Swift compiler and the [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") debugger.

Here are three changes that can help with your everyday debugging workflows.

### Faster variable inspection with the `p` and `po` commands

LLDB provides the shorthand `p` command alias to inspect variables and `po` to call the debugDescription property of objects. Originally, these were aliases for the rather heavyweight `expression` and `expression -O` commands. In Swift 5.9, the `p` and `po` command aliases have been redefined to the new `dwim-print` [command](https://reviews.llvm.org/D138315 "LLVM review"). The `dwim-print` command prints values using the most user-friendly implementation. "DWIM" is an acronym for "Do What I Mean". Specifically, when printing variables, `dwim-print` will use the same implementation as `frame variable` or `v` instead of the more expensive expression evaluator.

> In addition to being faster, using `p` no longer creates [persistent result variables](https://reviews.llvm.org/D145609 "LLVM review") like `$R0`, which are often unused in debugging sessions. Persistent result variables not only incur overhead but also retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution.

Reviewer 6: the program execution -> program execution

Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. If you wish to enable persistent results every time, you can take advantage of LLDB's handy alias feature, by putting the following into the `~/.lldbinit` file:

```
command unalias p
command alias p dwim-print --persistent-result on --
```

The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects even when only given a raw *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.

Old behavior in Swift 5.8 and earlier:
```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
(Int) 105553155867600
```

New behavior in Swift 5.9:
```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
<MyApp.AppDelegate: 0x6000025c43d0>
```

### Support for generic type parameters in expressions

LLDB now supports referring to generic type parameters in expression evaluation. For example, given the following code:

```swift
func use<T>(_ t: T) {
    print(t) // break here
}

use(5)
use("Hello!”)
```

> Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second.  In addition to displaying the concrete type of the generic, you can use this to set conditional that look for concrete types. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`. (Note that this last example only works on nightly builds of the Swift 5.9 toolchain.)

Reviewer 6: set conditional -> set conditions

---
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-08-25 12:34:56
title: Debugging Improvements in Swift 5.9
author: [adrian-prantl, augustonoronha, kastiglione]
---

Swift 5.9 introduced a number of new debugging features to the Swift compiler and the [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/ "LLDB project home page") debugger.

Here are three changes that can help with your everyday debugging workflows.

### Faster variable inspection with the `p` and `po` commands

LLDB provides the shorthand `p` command alias to inspect variables and `po` to call the debugDescription property of objects. Originally, these were aliases for the rather heavyweight `expression` and `expression -O` commands. In Swift 5.9, the `p` and `po` command aliases have been redefined to the new `dwim-print` command. The `dwim-print` command prints values using the most user-friendly implementation. "DWIM" is an acronym for "Do What I Mean". Specifically, when printing variables, `dwim-print` will use the same implementation as `frame variable` or `v` instead of the more expensive expression evaluator.

> "In addition to being faster, using `p` no longer creates persistent result variables like `$R0`, which are often unused in debugging sessions. Persistent result variables not only incur overhead but also retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:

Reviewer 2: Looks like there's an extra double quote here.

> "In addition to being faster, using `p` no longer creates persistent result variables like `$R0`, which are often unused in debugging sessions. Persistent result variables not only incur overhead but also retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:

Author: ```suggestion
In addition to being faster, using `p` no longer creates persistent result variables like `$R0`, which are often unused in debugging sessions. Persistent result variables not only incur overhead but also retain any objects they contain, which can be an unexpected side effect for the program execution. Users who want persistent results on occasion, can use `expression` (or a unique prefix such as `expr`) directly instead of `p`. To enable persistent results every time, the `p` alias can be redefined in the `~/.lldbinit` file:
```

```
command unalias p
command alias p dwim-print --persistent-result on --
```

> The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects by their *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.

Reviewer 2: "print Swift objects by their address" sounds like the basic functionality of telling me the address of a variable. Is a better way to saying this, "identifying Swift objects at a given address"?

> The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects by their *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.

Author: ```suggestion
The `dwim-print` command also gives `po` new functionality. The `po` command can now print Swift objects even when only given a raw *address*. When running `po <object-address>`, LLDB's embedded Swift compiler will automatically evaluate the expression `unsafeBitCast(<object-address>, to: AnyObject.self)` under the hood to produce the expected result.
```

```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
(Int) 105553155867600
```

New behavior in Swift 5.9:
```
(lldb) po 0x00006000025c43d0
<MyApp.AppDelegate: 0x6000025c43d0>
```

See [Introduce dwim-print command](https://reviews.llvm.org/D138315 "LLVM review") and [Change dwim-print to default to disabled persistent results](https://reviews.llvm.org/D145609 "LLVM review") for the patches that introduced these changes.

### Support for generic type parameters in expressions

LLDB now supports referring to generic type parameters in expression evaluation. For example, given the following code:

```swift
func use<T>(_ t: T) {
    print(t) // break here
}

use(5)
use("Hello!”)
```

Running `po T.self`, when stopped in `use`, will print `Int` when coming in through the first call, and `String` in the second.  In addition to displaying the concrete type of the generic, you can use this to set conditional that look for concrete types. For example, adding the following expression as the condition to a breakpoint inside `use` will only stop when the variable `t` is a `String`: `T.self == String.self`. (Note that this last example only works on nightly builds of the Swift 5.9 toolchain.)

> More details about the implementation of this feature can be found in the [LLDB PR](https://github.com/apple/llvm-project/pull/5715) introducing it.

Reviewer 2: Let's do "pull request" instead of PR.

> More details about the implementation of this feature can be found in the [LLDB PR](https://github.com/apple/llvm-project/pull/5715) introducing it.

Author: ```suggestion
More details about the implementation of this feature can be found in the [LLDB pull request](https://github.com/apple/llvm-project/pull/5715) introducing it.
```
